---
layout: post
author: pkalliok
title: >
  What is elegant code, actually?
excerpt: >
  TODO
tags:
- TODO
- simplicity
- Python
- Lisp
---

Many of my fellow coders, both colleagues and friends, have recently
talked a lot about writing elegant code and how important it is that
your code is elegant.  Of course, this is a very welcome development of
attitudes.  However, it still bugs me sometimes: what do all these
people _mean_ by elegant code?

The dictionary definition of "elegant" tells us that elegant is
basically the same as beautiful or tasteful, with an overtone of some
kind of extra effort, or refinement, put into the outcome.  The
important message here is, of course, that it is not enough for code to
just _work_, that is, execute correctly.  Extra effort has to be put
into making the code beautiful.  But isn't beauty in the eye of the
beholder?  Is elegance just one more flamebait topic for the religious
battles of programmers?

The problem is a little bit similar to the definition of "good manners".
People who were brought up in one culture (say, the Brasilian high
class) may not be conscious that what they have learned as "good
manners" are not universally accepted as such.  Likewise, people who
learned their programming skills in one programming culture (say, the
Lisp culture) may not see that their elegant code might be seen as
cumbersome, impractical, incomprehensible or downright ugly by people
who never learned the values of the Lisp culture.  A coder who has a
multicultural background will naturally adjust their coding style to
what will likely be accepted by those who will read their code.

However, I claim that code elegance is not _just_ a question of personal
preference.  Good manners are also not just arbitrary rules that live in
various cultures, there are many ways of social conduct that are
universally good: be interested, talk with people, listen and
understand, don't judge, be happy, and tell others you like them.  And
not surprisingly, there is a least common denominator for code elegance
that does not depend on who is reading the code.  I'm talking about
things that make code easier to produce, read, understand and maintain
_irrespectible_ of the programming culture.

It is not to say that one should disregard cultural elegance preferences
altogether, quite on the contrary: you must be aware which ways of
writing code are idiomatic in your particular choice of technologies
(languages, libraries, frameworks and toolchains).  But universally
elegant code makes your programs better in every culture, so its
principles are really important to understand.

